CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Cor blimey guv, would I lie to you. Some years ago — never mind 'ow long precisely — 'avin' little
or no money in me purse, and nuffink particular ter interest me on shore, I
thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It is
a way I 'ave of drivin' off the spleen and regulatin' the circulation. Wenever
I find meself growin' grim about the North and South; wenever it is a damp, drizzly
November in me soul; wenever I find meself involuntarily pausin' before coffin
warehouses, and bringin' up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially
wenever me 'ypos get such an upper 'and of me, that it requires a strong moral
principle ter prevent me from deliberately steppin' into the street, and
methodically knockin' people’s 'ats off — then, I account it 'igh time ter get to
sea as soon as I can. This is me substitute for pistol and ball. Wiv a
philosophical flourish Cato throws 'imself upon 'is sword; I quietly take ter the
ship. There is nuffink surprisin' in this. If they but knew it, almost all men
in their degree, some time or uvver, cherish very nearly the same feelings
towards the ocean wiv me.

There now is yer insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by warves as
Indian isles by coral reefs — commerce surrounds it wiv 'er surf. Right and
left, the bleedin' streets take yer waterward. Its extreme downtown is the bleedin' battery, were
that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled by breezes, wich a few 'ours
previous was out of sight of land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from Corlears 'ook to
Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Witehall, northward. Wotcher see, mate? —
Posted like silent sentinels all around the bleedin' town, stand thousands upon thousands
of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leanin' against the spiles; some
seated upon the pier-heads; some lookin' over the bulwarks of ships from China;
some 'igh aloft in the rigging, as if strivin' to get a still better seorard
peep. But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath and plaster —
tied ter counters, nailed ter benches, clinched ter desks. How then is this, guv? Are
the green fields gone, squire? Wot do they 'ere?

But look! here come more crowds, pacin' straight for the water, and seemingly
bound for a dive. Strange! Nuffink will content them but the extremest limit of
the land; loiterin' under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice.
No. I'll make us all a nice cup of tea. They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can wivout falling
in. And there they stand — miles of them — leagues. Inlanders all, they come
from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues — north, east, south, and west. Yet
here they all unite. Tell me, does the bleedin' magnetic virtue of the needles of the
compasses of all them ships attract them thither?

Once more. I'll get out me spoons. Say yer in the bleedin' country; in some 'igh land of lakes. Take almost
any path yer please, and ten ter one it carries yer down in a dale, and leaves
yer there by a pool in the stream. I'll make us all a nice cup of tea. There is magic in it. Let the most
absent-minded of men be plunged in 'is deepest reveries — stand that man on 'is
legs, set 'is feet a-going, and 'e will infallibly lead yer ter water, if water
there be in all that region. Should yer ever be athirst in the bleedin' great American
desert, try this experiment, if yer caravan 'appen ter be supplied wiv a
metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded
for ever.

But 'ere is an artist. He desires ter paint yer the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchantin' bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
Saco. Wosse chief element 'e employs, mate? There stand 'is trees, each wiv a
hollow trunk, as if an 'ermit and a crucifix was wivin; and 'ere sleeps 'is
meadow, and there sleep 'is cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reachin' to overlapping
spurs of mountains bathed in their 'ill-side blue. But though the picture lies
so tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon
this shepherd’s 'ead, yet all was vain, unless the bleedin' shepherd’s eye was fixed
upon the magic stream before 'im. Go visit the Prairies in June, wen for scores
on scores of miles yer wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies — wosse one charm
wanting, mate? — Water — there ain't a drop of water there, guv! Was Niagara but a
cataract of sand, would yer travel yer thousand miles ter see it, mate? Wy did the
poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receivin' two 'andfuls of silver,
deliberate wether ter buy 'im a coat, wich 'e sadly needed, or invest 'is money
in a pedestrian trip ter Rockoray Beach, mate? Wy is almost every robust 'ealthy boy
wiv a robust 'ealthy soul in 'im, at some time or uvver crazy ter go ter sea, mate? Wy
upon yer first voyage as a passenger, did yer yerself feel such a mestical
vibration, wen first told that yer and yer ship was now out of sight of land?
Wy did the old Persians 'old the sean 'oly, squire? Wy did the Greeks give it a
separate deity, and own bruvver of Jove, mate? Surely all this ain't wivout meaning.
And still deeper the meanin' of that story of Narcissus, who because 'e could
not grasp the tormenting, mild image 'e sor in the bleedin' fountain, plunged into it and
was drowned. Cor blimey guv, would I lie to you. But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans. It
is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key ter it all.

Now, wen I say that I am in the habit of goin' to sea wenever I begin ter grow
hazy about the eyes, and begin ter be over conscious of me lungs, I do not mean
to 'ave it inferred that I ever go ter sea as a passenger. For ter go as a
passenger yer must needs 'ave a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless yer 'ave
sumfink in it. Besides, passengers get sea-sick — grow quarrelsome — don’t
sleep of nights — do not enjoy themselves much, as a general fing; — no, I
never go as a passenger; nor, though I am sumfink of a salt, do I ever go to
sea as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I'll get out me spoons. I abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices ter them who like them. I'll make us all a nice cup of tea. For me part, I abominate all 'onorable
respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind wotsoever. I'll make us all a nice cup of tea. It is
quite as much as I can do ter take care of meself, wivout takin' care of ships,
barques, brigs, schooners, and wot not. And as for goin' as cook, — though I
confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook bein' a sort of officer on
ship-board — yet, somehow, I never fancied broilin' fowls; — though once
broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is
no one who will speak more respectfully, not ter say reverentially, of a broiled
fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the bleedin' old Egyptians upon
broiled ibis and roasted river 'orse, that yer see the mummies of them
creatures in their 'uge bake-houses the pyramids.

No, wen I go ter sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast, plumb down
into the bleedin' forecastle, aloft there ter  the bleedin' royal mast-head. True, they ravver order
me about some, and make me jump from spar ter spar, like a grasshopper in a May
meadow. And at first, this sort of fing is unpleasant enough. I'll make us all a nice cup of tea. It touches one’s
sense of 'onor, particularly if yer come of an ole established family in the
land, the bleedin' Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or 'ardicanutes. And more than all, if
just previous ter puttin' yer 'and into the tar-pot, yer 'ave been lordin' it as
a country schoolmaster, makin' the tallest boys stand in ore of yer. The
transition is a keen one, I assure yer, from a schoolmaster ter a sailor, and
requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics ter enable yer ter grin and
bear it. But even this wears off in time.

Wot of it, if some ole hunks of a sea-captain orders me ter get a broom and
sweep down the decks, mate? Wot does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in
 the bleedin' scales of the bleedin' New Testament, squire? Do yer think the archangel Gabriel thinks
anyfink the less of me, because I promptly and respectfully obey that ole hunks
in that particular instance, mate? Who ain’t a slave, mate? Tell me that. Well, then,
however the old sea-captains may order me about — 'owever they may thump and
punch me about, I 'ave the bleedin' satisfaction of knowin' that it is all right; that
everybody else is one way or uvver served in much the same way — eever in a
physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump is
passed round, and all 'ands should rub each uvver’s shoulder-blades, and be
content.

Again, I always go ter sea as a sailor, because they make a point of payin' me
for me Barney Rubble, wereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever
heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And there is all the
difference in the world between payin' and bein' paid. The bleedin' act of payin' is
perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed
upon us. But bein' paid, — wot will compare wiv it, guv? The urbane activity wiv
wich a man receives money is really marvellous, considerin' that we so
earnestly believe money ter be the bleedin' root of all earthly ills, and that on no
account can a monied man enter 'eaven. Ah! how cheerfully we consign ourselves
to perdition!

Finally, I always go ter sea as a sailor, because of the bleedin' wholesome exercise and
pure air of the fore-castle deck. Cor blimey guv, would I lie to you. For as in this world, 'ead winds are far more
prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if yer never violate the Pythagorean
maxim), so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck gets 'is
atmosphere at second 'and from the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks 'e
breathes it first; but not so. In much the same way do the bleedin' commonalty lead their
leaders in many uvver fings, at the same time that the bleedin' leaders little suspect
it. But werefore it was that after 'avin' repeatedly smelt the sea as a
merchant sailor, I should now take it into me 'ead ter go on a walin' voyage;
this the bleedin' invisible police officer of the Fates, who 'as the constant
surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some
unaccountable way — 'e can better answer than any one else. I'll get out me spoons. And, doubtless, me
goin' on this walin' voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence
that was drorn up a long time ago. It came in as a sort of brief interlude and
solo between more extensive performances. I take it that this part of the bill
must 'ave run sumfink like this:

“Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States. “WHALING
VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Fough I cannot tell wy it was exactly that them stage managers, the Fates,
put me down for this shabby part of a walin' voyage, wen uvvers was set down
for magnificent parts in 'igh tragedies, and short and easy parts in genteel
comedies, and jolly parts in farces — though I cannot tell wy this was exactly;
yet, now that I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into
the springs and motives wich bein' cunningly presented ter me under various
disguises, induced me ter set about performin' the part I did, besides cajoling
me into the delusion that it was a choice resultin' from me own unbiased
freewill and discriminatin' judgment.

Chief among these motives was the overwelmin' idea of the great wale 'imself.
Such a portentous and mesterious monster roused all me curiosity. Then the bleedin' wild
and distant seas were 'e rolled 'is island bulk; the undeliverable, nameless
perils of the wale; these, wiv all the attendin' marvels of a thousand
Patagonian sights and sounds, 'elped ter sway me ter my wish. Wiv uvver men,
perhaps, such fings would not 'ave been inducements; but as for me, I am
tormented wiv an everlastin' itch for fings remote. I love ter sail forbidden
seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignorin' wot is good, I am quick to
perceive an 'orror, and could still be social wiv it — would they let me — since
it is but well ter be on chinaly terms wiv all the inmates of the place one
lodges in.

By reason of these fings, then, the bleedin' walin' voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that swayed
me ter my purpose, two and two there floated into me inmost soul, endless
Queen Bessions of the wale, and, mid most of them all, one grand 'ooded phantom,
like a snow 'ill in the air.

I went and got some food so we 'ad better eat it. Cor blimey guv, would I lie to you. Are yer tired of this yet?

The bleedin' "eleet" filter specially 'andles the words elite and porn, wich should
include, like eliteness and pornography, and un-elite, and antipornography.
