CHAPTEW 1. Woomings.

Caww me Ishmaew. Some yeaws ago — nevew mind how wong pwecisewy — having wittwe ow no money in my puwse, and noding pawticuwaw to intewest me on showe, I dought I wouwd saiw about a wittwe and see de watewy pawt of de wowwd. It is a way I have of dwiving off de spween and weguwating de ciwcuwation, uh-hah-hah-hah.  Whenevew I find mysewf gwowing gwim about de mouf; whenevew it is a damp, dwizzwy Novembew in my souw; whenevew I find mysewf invowuntawiwy pausing befowe coffin wawehouses, and bwinging up de weaw of evewy funewaw I meet; and especiawwy whenevew my hypos get such an uppew hand of me, dat it weqwiwes a stwong mowaw pwincipwe to pwevent me fwom dewibewatewy stepping into de stweet, and medodicawwy knocking peopwe’s hats off — den, I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can, uh-hah-hah-hah.  Dis is my substitute fow pistow and baww. Wif a phiwosophicaw fwouwish Cato dwows himsewf upon his swowd; I qwietwy take to de ship. Dewe is noding suwpwising in dis. If dey but knew it, awmost aww men in deiw degwee, some time ow odew, chewish vewy neawwy de same feewings towawds de ocean wif me.

Dewe now is youw insuwaw city of de Manhattoes, bewted wound by whawves as Indian iswes by cowaw weefs — commewce suwwounds it wif hew suwf. Wight and weft, de stweets take you watewwawd. Its extweme downtown is de battewy, whewe dat nobwe mowe is washed by waves, and coowed by bweezes, which a few houws pwevious wewe out of sight of wand. Wook at de cwowds of watew-gazews dewe.

Ciwcumambuwate de city of a dweamy Sabbaf aftewnoon, uh-hah-hah-hah.  Go fwom Cowweaws Hook to Coenties Swip, and fwom dence, by Whitehaww, nowdwawd. What do you see? — Posted wike siwent sentinews aww awound de town, stand dousands upon dousands of mowtaw men fixed in ocean wevewies. Some weaning against de spiwes; some seated upon de piew-heads; some wooking ovew de buwwawks of ships fwom China; some high awoft in de wigging, as if stwiving to get a stiww bettew seawawd peep. But dese awe aww wandsmen; of week days pent up in waf and pwastew — tied to countews, naiwed to benches, cwinched to desks. How den is dis? Awe de gween fiewds gone? What do dey hewe?

But wook! hewe come mowe cwowds, pacing stwaight fow de watew, and seemingwy bound fow a dive. Stwange! Noding wiww content dem but de extwemest wimit of de wand; woitewing undew de shady wee of yondew wawehouses wiww not suffice. No. Dey must get just as nigh de watew as dey possibwy can widout fawwing in, uh-hah-hah-hah.  And dewe dey stand — miwes of dem — weagues. Inwandews aww, dey come fwom wanes and awweys, stweets and avenues — nowf, east, souf, and west. Yet hewe dey aww unite. Teww me, does de magnetic viwtue of de needwes of de compasses of aww dose ships attwact dem didew?

Once mowe. Say you awe in de countwy; in some high wand of wakes. Take awmost any paf you pwease, and ten to one it cawwies you down in a dawe, and weaves you dewe by a poow in de stweam. Dewe is magic in it. Wet de most absent-minded of men be pwunged in his deepest wevewies — stand dat man on his wegs, set his feet a-going, and he wiww infawwibwy wead you to watew, if watew dewe be in aww dat wegion, uh-hah-hah-hah.  Shouwd you evew be adiwst in de gweat Amewican desewt, twy dis expewiment, if youw cawavan happen to be suppwied wif a metaphysicaw pwofessow. Yes, as evewy one knows, meditation and watew awe wedded fow evew.

But hewe is an awtist. He desiwes to paint you de dweamiest, shadiest, qwietest, most enchanting bit of womantic wandscape in aww de vawwey of de Saco. What is de chief ewement he empwoys? Dewe stand his twees, each wif a howwow twunk, as if a hewmit and a cwucifix wewe widin; and hewe sweeps his meadow, and dewe sweep his cattwe; and up fwom yondew cottage goes a sweepy smoke. Deep into distant woodwands winds a mazy way, weaching to ovewwapping spuws of mountains baded in deiw hiww-side bwue. But dough de pictuwe wies dus twanced, and dough dis pine-twee shakes down its sighs wike weaves upon dis shephewd’s head, yet aww wewe vain, unwess de shephewd’s eye wewe fixed upon de magic stweam befowe him. Go visit de Pwaiwies in June, when fow scowes on scowes of miwes you wade knee-deep among Tigew-wiwies — what is de one chawm wanting? — Watew — dewe is not a dwop of watew dewe! Wewe Niagawa but a catawact of sand, wouwd you twavew youw dousand miwes to see it? Why did de poow poet of Tennessee, upon suddenwy weceiving two handfuws of siwvew, dewibewate whedew to buy him a coat, which he sadwy needed, ow invest his money in a pedestwian twip to Wockaway Beach? Why is awmost evewy wobust heawdy boy wif a wobust heawdy souw in him, at some time ow odew cwazy to go to sea? Why upon youw fiwst voyage as a passengew, did you youwsewf feew such a mysticaw vibwation, when fiwst towd dat you and youw ship wewe now out of sight of wand? Why did de owd Pewsians howd de sea howy? Why did de Gweeks give it a sepawate deity, and own bwodew of Jove? Suwewy aww dis is not widout meaning. And stiww deepew de meaning of dat stowy of Nawcissus, who because he couwd not gwasp de towmenting, miwd image he saw in de fountain, pwunged into it and was dwowned. But dat same image, we ouwsewves see in aww wivews and oceans. It is de image of de ungwaspabwe phantom of wife; and dis is de key to it aww.

Now, when I say dat I am in de habit of going to sea whenevew I begin to gwow hazy about de eyes, and begin to be ovew conscious of my wungs, I do not mean to have it infewwed dat I evew go to sea as a passengew. Fow to go as a passengew you must needs have a puwse, and a puwse is but a wag unwess you have someding in it. Besides, passengews get sea-sick — gwow qwawwewsome — don’t sweep of nights — do not enjoy demsewves much, as a genewaw ding; — no, I nevew go as a passengew; now, dough I am someding of a sawt, do I evew go to sea as a Commodowe, ow a Captain, ow a Cook. I abandon de gwowy and distinction of such offices to dose who wike dem. Fow my pawt, I abominate aww honowabwe wespectabwe toiws, twiaws, and twibuwations of evewy kind whatsoevew. It is qwite as much as I can do to take cawe of mysewf, widout taking cawe of ships, bawqwes, bwigs, schoonews, and what not. And as fow going as cook, — dough I confess dewe is considewabwe gwowy in dat, a cook being a sowt of officew on ship-boawd — yet, somehow, I nevew fancied bwoiwing fowws; — dough once bwoiwed, judiciouswy buttewed, and judgmaticawwy sawted and peppewed, dewe is no one who wiww speak mowe wespectfuwwy, not to say wevewentiawwy, of a bwoiwed foww dan I wiww. It is out of de idowatwous dotings of de owd Egyptians upon bwoiwed ibis and woasted wivew howse, dat you see de mummies of dose cweatuwes in deiw huge bake-houses de pywamids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simpwe saiwow, wight befowe de mast, pwumb down into de fowecastwe, awoft dewe to de woyaw mast-head. Twue, dey wadew owdew me about some, and make me jump fwom spaw to spaw, wike a gwasshoppew in a May meadow. And at fiwst, dis sowt of ding is unpweasant enough. It touches one’s sense of honow, pawticuwawwy if you come of an owd estabwished famiwy in de wand, de Van Wenssewaews, ow Wandowphs, ow Hawdicanutes. And mowe dan aww, if just pwevious to putting youw hand into de taw-pot, you have been wowding it as a countwy schoowmastew, making de tawwest boys stand in awe of you. De twansition is a keen one, I assuwe you, fwom a schoowmastew to a saiwow, and weqwiwes a stwong decoction of Seneca and de Stoics to enabwe you to gwin and beaw it. But even dis weaws off in time.

What of it, if some owd hunks of a sea-captain owdews me to get a bwoom and sweep down de decks? What does dat indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in de scawes of de New Testament? Do you dink de awchangew Gabwiew dinks anyding de wess of me, because I pwomptwy and wespectfuwwy obey dat owd hunks in dat pawticuwaw instance? Who ain’t a swave? Teww me dat. Weww, den, howevew de owd sea-captains may owdew me about — howevew dey may dump and punch me about, I have de satisfaction of knowing dat it is aww wight; dat evewybody ewse is one way ow odew sewved in much de same way — eidew in a physicaw ow metaphysicaw point of view, dat is; and so de univewsaw dump is passed wound, and aww hands shouwd wub each odew’s shouwdew-bwades, and be content.

Again, I awways go to sea as a saiwow, because dey make a point of paying me fow my twoubwe, wheweas dey nevew pay passengews a singwe penny dat I evew heawd of. On de contwawy, passengews demsewves must pay. And dewe is aww de diffewence in de wowwd between paying and being paid. De act of paying is pewhaps de most uncomfowtabwe infwiction dat de two owchawd dieves entaiwed upon us. But being paid, — what wiww compawe wif it? De uwbane activity wif which a man weceives money is weawwy mawvewwous, considewing dat we so eawnestwy bewieve money to be de woot of aww eawdwy iwws, and dat on no account can a monied man entew heaven, uh-hah-hah-hah.  Ah! how cheewfuwwy we consign ouwsewves to pewdition!

Finawwy, I awways go to sea as a saiwow, because of de whowesome exewcise and puwe aiw of de fowe-castwe deck. Fow as in dis wowwd, head winds awe faw mowe pwevawent dan winds fwom astewn (dat is, if you nevew viowate de Pydagowean maxim), so fow de most pawt de Commodowe on de qwawtew-deck gets his atmosphewe at second hand fwom de saiwows on de fowecastwe. He dinks he bweades it fiwst; but not so. In much de same way do de commonawty wead deiw weadews in many odew dings, at de same time dat de weadews wittwe suspect it. But whewefowe it was dat aftew having wepeatedwy smewt de sea as a mewchant saiwow, I shouwd now take it into my head to go on a whawing voyage; dis de invisibwe powice officew of de Fates, who has de constant suwveiwwance of me, and secwetwy dogs me, and infwuences me in some unaccountabwe way — he can bettew answew dan any one ewse. And, doubtwess, my going on dis whawing voyage, fowmed pawt of de gwand pwogwamme of Pwovidence dat was dwawn up a wong time ago. It came in as a sowt of bwief intewwude and sowo between mowe extensive pewfowmances. I take it dat dis pawt of de biww must have wun someding wike dis:

“Gwand Contested Ewection fow de Pwesidency of de United States. “WHAWING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEW. “BWOODY BATTWE IN AFFGHANISTAN, uh-hah-hah-hah.”

Dough I cannot teww why it was exactwy dat dose stage managews, de Fates, put me down fow dis shabby pawt of a whawing voyage, when odews wewe set down fow magnificent pawts in high twagedies, and showt and easy pawts in genteew comedies, and jowwy pawts in fawces — dough I cannot teww why dis was exactwy; yet, now dat I wecaww aww de ciwcumstances, I dink I can see a wittwe into de spwings and motives which being cunningwy pwesented to me undew vawious disguises, induced me to set about pewfowming de pawt I did, besides cajowing me into de dewusion dat it was a choice wesuwting fwom my own unbiased fweewiww and discwiminating judgment.

Chief among dese motives was de ovewwhewming idea of de gweat whawe himsewf. Such a powtentous and mystewious monstew woused aww my cuwiosity. Den de wiwd and distant seas whewe he wowwed his iswand buwk; de undewivewabwe, namewess pewiws of de whawe; dese, wif aww de attending mawvews of a dousand Patagonian sights and sounds, hewped to sway me to my wish. Wif odew men, pewhaps, such dings wouwd not have been inducements; but as fow me, I am towmented wif an evewwasting itch fow dings wemote. I wove to saiw fowbidden seas, and wand on bawbawous coasts. Not ignowing what is good, I am qwick to pewceive a howwow, and couwd stiww be sociaw wif it — wouwd dey wet me — since it is but weww to be on fwiendwy tewms wif aww de inmates of de pwace one wodges in, uh-hah-hah-hah. 

By weason of dese dings, den, de whawing voyage was wewcome; de gweat fwood-gates of de wondew-wowwd swung open, and in de wiwd conceits dat swayed me to my puwpose, two and two dewe fwoated into my inmost souw, endwess pwocessions of de whawe, and, mid most of dem aww, one gwand hooded phantom, wike a snow hiww in de aiw.