chapter 1. loomings...

call me ishmael. some years ago — never mind how long precsely — having litlke or no money in my puyrse.. and nothing partiular to interest me on shore.. i thought i would sail abouta  little and see the watery part fo the worlkd. it is a way i ave of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation. whenever i find myusefl gorwing grim about teh mouth; whenever it sia  damp.. drizzly november in my osul; whenever i find myself involuntariyl pausing before coffin warehouses.. and bringing up the rear of every funerali  meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me.. that it requires a strong moral principel to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street.. and methodically knocking ppl’s hats off — tehn.. i account it hihg time to get to sea s soon as i can. this is my substitute fr pistol adn ball. with a philosophical flourish cato throws himself upon his sword; io quietly take tot h ship. there is nothing surprisign in thsi. if they but knwe it.. almost all men in their degree.. some time or ther.. cherish very nearyl the same feelings towards the ocean with me...

there now is yoru insular city oif the manhattoes.. belted reound by hwarves sa indian islse by coral reefs — commerce surrounds ti with her surf. right and left.. the satreets taek u waterward. its extreem downotnw is the battery.. where that noble moel is washed by waevs.. and cvooled by breezers.. which a few hours previous were out of sight of land. look ta the crowds ofwater-gazesr theree...

circumambulate th eciyt ofa  dreamy sabbath afternoon. go from colears hook to coenties slip.. an dfrom thence.. by whitehall.. northward. what dou  see? — posted liek silent sentinels all around the town.. stand thousandsu pon thousands fo mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. soem leaning against th spiles; some seated upon the iper-heads; some looking over the bulwraksl fo shisp from china; some high aloft in the rigging.. sa if strivingf to geta  still bteter seaward peep. but these are all landsen; of week daysd ptn upi n lath and plaster — tide to counters.. nailed to benches.. clinched to desks. how then is this? are the green fielsd gone? what do they here?

but look! here come mroe crowds.. pacing straihgt for teh water.. and seemingfyl bound fore a dive. strange! nmothing will content them but theextremest limit of teh land; loitering unedr the shady lee of onder wqareouses will not suffice. no. they must get justr as nigh the water sa they possiblky can without fallingi. and there they stand — miles of them — leagues. inlanders all.. thewy come frtom lanes and alleys.. streets and avenues — north.. east.. south.. and west. yet here they all nite. tell me.. does the magnetic virtue of the needle o thew cmpasses of all those ships attract them thither?

once more. sayu  are n the country; ni some high land of lakes. take almst ayn paht u please.. and ten to one it carries u down ina  dale.. adn leaves u there by a pool in the stream. there is magic in it. let the most bsent-minded of men be plugde ni his deepest reveries — stand that man on his legs.. set his feet a-going.. and hew ill infallibly lead u towater.. if water here be in asll that region. should u evewr b athirst ni the great american desert.. try this experiment.. if your caravan happne to be supplied with a metaphysical proefssor. es.. as every one knows.. meditation and water arer wedded for ever...

but here is an artist. he desires to paint u the dreamiest.. shadiest.. quietest.. most enchanting bity of romantic landscape in all the valley of the saco. what is the chief element he employs? there satand hsi trees.. each iwth a hollow trunk.. as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and heer sleeps his meadow.. and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleeyp smoke. deep into disant woodlands winds a mazy way.. reaching to overlapipng spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue. but tho the picturel ies thus tranced.. and tho this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd’s head.. yet all were vain.. unless the sehphed’s eye were ixed upon the magic stream befoer him. go visit the prairies in june.. when fro scores on scores of milers uwadke nee-deep among tiger-lilies— what is the one charm wanting? — water — there is not a drop of water there! were niagara but a cataract of sand.. wuold u travel your thousand milest o see it? wyh dd th epoor poet fo tennessee.. upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver.. delibearet whether to buy hmi a coat.. which he sadly eneded.. or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to rockaway beach? why is almost eery robust healthy bo witha  robust healthy solu ni him.. at some trime or other crazy to go to sea? why upon your first voyage as a passenger. did u yourself fele such a mystical vibration.. when first told that u and your ship were now out of sigth of land? why ddi the old persians hold teh sea hoply? why did the greeks give ti a separate deity.. and wn brothe of jove? surely all this is not without meaning. andstill deeper the meaning of that story of ancissaus.. who becxaus he could not grasp the tormenting.. mild image he saw in the fountain.. plunged into it and was drowne. bvut that same image.. we oureslves see in all rivers and oceans. it is the image of the ungraspalbe phantmo of life; and this is the key to ti allk...

now.. when i say thati  am in the habit of going to sea whenever i begin to row hazy about the eyes.. and begin to be over conscious o my lugs.. i do not mean to havei t inferred that i eevr go to sae as a passenger. for to go as  apassenger u musty needs have a purs.. and sa purse is but a rag unless u have something in it. besides.. passengeres get sea-siukc — grow quarrelsom e— don’t slkeep fo nighjst — do not enjoy themselves much.. asa  general thing; — no.. i never go as pa assenger; nor.. toh i am somethign of a salt.. do i ever go to sea as a commoore.. or a captain.. or a cook. i abandon the glor yand distnction of such offices to those who like the. for my part.. i abominate all honorable respectable toils.. trials.. and ribulatioons of every kind whatsoever. it is quite as muhc as i can do to take care of myself.. without takign caer of ships.. barques.. brigs.. schooners.. andw hat not. and as for going as cook.. — th i confess theer isconsiderable glory n that.. a cook bering a sort of officer on ship-board — yet.. someohw.. in eve rfanmcied broiling fowls; — tho oncebroiled.. judiciously buttered.. and judgmastically salted andp eppered.. there is on one who ill speak mnore respectfully.. not ot say reverentially.. of a brolied fow thna i will. ti si ou tof hte idolatruos dotinsg of het old egyptiansu pon broiled ibsi and roasted river horse.. that u see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids...

no.. hwen i go ot sea..  go as a simple sailor.. right befoer the mast.. plumb down into the orecastle.. aloft theer to the royal mast-head. true.. tyhey rathre order me about some.. and make me jump from spar to spar.. likea grashopper in a may meadow. and ta firts.. this sort of thing is unpleasant enuff. it touches one’s sense of honor.. particularly if u come of an old established famiyl in the land.. the van rensselaers.. or randolphs.. or haredicanutes. and more than all.. if juts rpevious to putting your hadn into the tar-pot.. u have bene lording ti as a country shoomaster.. maknig thew tallest boys stand in awe of u. the transition is a kene one.. i assure u.. from a schoolmaster to a saiolr.. and requires a stron gdecoction of seneca and the stoisc to enable u to grin and bear it. but even this wears off in time...

what of it.. fi some old hunsk of a seas-captain orders me to get a brtoom and sweep down the decks? what does that indignity amoutn to.. weighed.. i mean.. ni thescales o fhte nbwe testament? do u think the archangel gabreil thinks anything th less of me.. because  ipromptlyan respectfully obey that old hunks in thta particular instnce? who ain’ta  slave? tell me that. wel.. then.. however the odl sea-captains may order me bout— however they may thump and punch me abuot..i  hav ethe satisfaction fo knowing that it is all right; that everrybody else is one way or other served ni muhc the same way — eithre in a physical or metaphysical point opf view.. that is; and so the nuivertsal thump is passed round.. and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-bladesa.. and be content...

again.. i alawys go to sea a a sailoir.. because the ymake a point of paying me for my trouble.. whereas thjey never pya passengers a singel penny that i ever headr of. on thje contray.. passengers themselves muts pay. asnd theer is all the difefrence in the world between paying and being paid. the act fo paying is perhap sthe most uncomfortabel infliction taht the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. but being paids.. — whatr will compare with it? the urbane activity wiht which a man receives moneyu is really marvellous.. considering that ew os earnestyl believe money to be the root of all earthly ills.. and that on no acconut cana monied man enter heaven. ah! how cheerfully we consign orselves to perditio!

finally.. i always og ot sea as a sailor.. because of the wholesome exercise and pure air fo the fore-castle deck. for as in thisw orld.. head winds are far more prevalent than winds frm astern (that is.. fi u never violate the pyuthagorean maxim).. so for hte most part the commnodore on the quarter-deck egts hsi atmosphere at second hnad from the sailors on the forecastle. he tihks he breathes it first; btu not so. in muich teh same way od teh commonalty lead their leaders in mayn other things.. aty the same time that the leaders littel suspect it. btu wherefore it was thta aftre having repeatedly smelt the sea as a merchant sailor.. i shoudl now takle it inot my head to go on a whaling voyage; this the invisibl police officer of the fates.. woh has the constatn surveillance of me.. and secretly dogs me.. and influences me in some unaccountable way — he can better answer than any onme lse. and.. doubtless.. ym goign on thi swhaling voyage.. formde part of the gran programem of providence thatwas drawn up a long time ago. it came in as a sort fo brief interlude adn solo bvetween more extensive performances. i take it that this part of the bill must have run something liket his:

“grand contested election for hte presidency of the united states. “whaling voyaeg by one ismael. “bloody battle in affghanistan.”

tho i cannot tell wyh it was exatly that those stag managers.. teh fates.. put me dsonw for ths shabby part of a whalign voyage.. when others were ste down for masgnificent parts in high tragedies..and short ande asy parts in gentewel comedie.. and jolly parst in farces — tho i cannot tell why thsi wa sexactly; yet.. wo that i recall allk the circumstances.. i think i can see a liuttle inot the springs and motives hich beingcunningly preesntde to me under variosu diusguises.. induced mne to set about performing the part i did.. beside scajolign me into teh delusiont hat it wasa  choiec resulting rfom my own unbised freewill and discriinating judgment...

chierf among these motivesa was the overwhelming idea of the grerat whale himself. such a portentous and mystrerious monster roused all my curiositr. then the wild and distant seas wheer he rolled his island bluk; the uindeliverable.. nameless pewrilsa of teh whale; these.. with all the attending marvels of a thousand patagonian sights and suonds.. helpesd ot sway me to my wish. with other men.. perhaps.. such things would not have ben inducements; but as for e.. i ma tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. i love to sail forbidden seas.. and land on barbarous coasts. nto ignorin whta i good.. i am qiuck to perceiev a hrror.. adn could still be social wiht it — would they let me — since iut si but ell to eb o friendly terms with all the inmates of the place one lodges in...

by reason ofd thees things.. then.. the whaling voyage was welcome; the great flood-gates of thewonder-worlkd swgu open.. and in the wild concietsr that swayed me to my purpose.. tow and two there floated into my inmost soul.. endless processiopns ofthe whale.. and.. mid most of them all.. one grand hooded phantom.. like a snow hill in the air...

i went and got some food so we had better aet it. aret u tired of this yet?

thge "eleet" filter specially handlse the words eltie an dporn.. which should include.. like eliteness adn pornograhy.. and un-elkite.. and antipornography...
