CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago — never mind 'ow long precisely — 'avin' little or no money in me purse, 'n' nofin' particular to interest me on shore, I fought Oy would saiw about a little 'n' see the bloody watery part of the world. It is a why I 'ave of drivin' off the flinkin' spleen 'n' regulatin' the circulation. Whenever I find myself growin' grim about the bleedin' mowf; whenever i' is a damp, drizzly November in me soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausin' before coffin warehouses, 'n' bringin' up the rear of every funeral I meet; 'n' especially whenever me 'ypos ge' such an upper 'and of me, that i' requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately steppin' into the soddin' street, 'n' mefodically knockin' people’s 'ats off — ven, Oy account i' 'igh toime to ge' to sea as soon as I can. This is me substitute for pistol 'n' ball. Wif a philosophical flourish Cato frows 'imself upon 'is sword; I quietly tike to the ship. There is nofin' surprisin' in this. If vey but knew i', almost all men in veir degree, some toime or uvver, cherish very nearly the bloody sime feelings towards the ocean wif me.

There now is yer insular city of the flinkin' Manhattoes, belted round by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs — commerce surrounds i' wif 'er surf. Roit 'n' left, the streets tike y'waterward. Its extreme downtown is the bleedin' battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, 'n' cooled by breezes, which a few 'ours previous wuz out of soit of land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers vere.

Circumambulate the soddin' city of a dreamy Sabbaf afternoon. Go from Corlears 'ook to Coenties Slip, 'n' from vence, by Whitehall, norvward. What do y'see, roit? — Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand fousands upon fousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leanin' against the bloody spiles; some seated upon the pier-'eads; some lookin' over the flinkin' bulwarks of ships from China; some 'igh aloft in the riggin', as if strivin' to ge' a still better seaward peep. But vese are all landsmen; of week days pent up in laf 'n' plaster — tied to counters, naiwed to benches, clinched to desks. 'ow ven is this, roit? Are the bleedin' green fields gone, roit? What do vey 'ere, roit?

But look! 'ere come more crowds, pacin' straoit for the water, 'n' seemingly bound for a dive. Strange! Nofin' will content vem but the soddin' extremest limit of the land; loiterin' unner the bloody shady lee of yunner warehouses will not suffice. No. They must ge' just as nigh the water as vey possibly can wifout fallin' in. And vere vey stand — miles of vem — leagues. Inlanders all, vey come from lanes 'n' alleys, streets 'n' avenues — norv, east, sowf, 'n' west. Yet 'ere vey all unite. Tell me, does the flinkin' magnetic virtue of the needles of the bleedin' compasses of all fose ships attract vem fivver, roit?

Once more. Sigh you are in the country; in some 'igh land of lakes. Tike almost enny paf y'please, 'n' ten to one i' carries y'down in a dale, 'n' leaves y'vere by a pool in the soddin' stream. There is magic in i'. Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in 'is deepest reveries — stand that man on 'is legs, set 'is feet a-goin', 'n' 'e will infallibly lead y'to water, if water vere be in all that region. Should you ever be afirst in the bloody great American desert, try this experiment, if yer caravan 'appen to be supplied wif a metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation 'n' water are wedded for ever.

But 'ere is an artist. 'e desires to paint y'the dreamiest, shadiest, quietest, most enchantin' bi' of romantic landscape in all the flinkin' valley of the Saco. What is the bleedin' chief element 'e employs, roit? There stand 'is trees, each wif a 'ollow trunk, as if a 'ermit 'n' a crucifix wuz wifin; 'n' 'ere sleeps 'is meadow, 'n' vere sleep 'is cattle; 'n' up from yunner cottage goes a sleepy smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy why, reachin' to overlappin' spurs of mountains bavved in veir 'ill-side blue. But fough the picture lies fus tranced, 'n' fough this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd’s 'ead, yet all wuz vain, unless the soddin' shepherd’s eye wuz fixed upon the magic stream before 'im. Go visit the bloody Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles y'wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies — what is the one charm wantin', roit? — Water — vere is not a drop of water vere! Were Niagara but a cataract of sand, would y'travel yer fousand miles to see i', roit? Why did the flinkin' poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receivin' two 'andfuls of silver, deliberate whevver to buy 'im a coat, which 'e sadly needed, or invest 'is money in a pedestrian trip to Rockawhy Beach, roit? Why is almost every robust 'ealvy boy wif a robust 'ealvy soul in 'im, at some toime or uvver crazy to gow to sea, roit? Why upon yer first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first towld that you 'n' yer ship wuz now out of soit of land, roit? Why did the owld Persians 'owld the bleedin' sea 'oly, roit? Why did the Greeks give i' a separate deity, 'n' own bruvver of Jove, roit? Surely all this is not wifout meanin'. And still deeper the soddin' meanin' of that story of Narcissus, who because 'e could not grasp the tormentin', mild image 'e saw in the bloody fountain, plunged into i' 'n' wuz drowned. But that sime image, we ourselves see in all rivers 'n' oceans. It is the image of the flinkin' ungraspable phantom of life; 'n' this is the key to i' all.

Now, when I sigh that I am in the bleedin' 'abi' of goin' to sea whenever Oy begin to grow 'azy about the eyes, 'n' begin to be over conscious of me lungs, I do not mean to 'ave i' inferred that I ever gow to sea as a passenger. For to gow as a passenger y'must needs 'ave a purse, 'n' a purse is but a rag unless y''ave somefin' in i'. Besides, passengers ge' sea-sick — grow quarrelsome — don’t sleep of noits — do not enjoy vemselves much, as a general fin'; — no, I never gow as a passenger; nor, fough I am somefin' of a salt, do Oy ever gow to sea as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the soddin' glory 'n' distinction of such offices to fose who like vem. For me part, I abominate all 'onorable respectable toils, trials, 'n' tribulations of every kind whatsoever. It is quite as much as I can do to tike care of myself, wifout takin' care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, 'n' what not. And as for goin' as cook, — fough I confess vere is considerable glory in that, a cook bein' a sort of officer on ship-board — yet, somehow, Oy never fancied broilin' fowls; — fough once broiled, judiciously buttered, 'n' judgmatically salted 'n' peppered, vere is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to sigh reverentially, of a broiled fowl fan I will. It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the bloody owld Egyptians upon broiled ibis 'n' roasted river 'orse, that y'see the mummies of fose creatures in veir 'uge bike-'ouses the flinkin' pyramids.

No, when I gow to sea, I gow as a simple saiwor, roit before the mast, plumb down into the bleedin' forecastle, aloft vere to the royal mast-'ead. True, vey ravver order me about some, 'n' mike me jump from spar to spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of fin' is unpleasant enough. It touches one’s sense of 'onor, particularly if y'come of an owld established family in the soddin' land, the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or 'ardicanutes. And more fan all, if just previous to puttin' yer 'and into the bloody tar-pot, y''ave been lordin' i' as a country schoolmaster, makin' the tallest boys stand in awe of you. The flinkin' transition is a keen one, I assure you, from a schoolmaster to a saiwor, 'n' requires a strong decoction of Seneca 'n' the Stoics to enable y'to grin 'n' bear i'. But even this wears off in toime.

What of i', if some owld 'unks of a sea-captain orders me to ge' a broom 'n' sweep down the bleedin' decks, roit? What does that indignity amount to, weighed, Oy mean, in the scales of the soddin' New Testament, roit? Do y'fink the archangel Gabriel finks ennyvin' the bloody less of me, because I promptly 'n' respectfully obey that owld 'unks in that particular instance, roit? Who ain’t a slave, roit? Tell me that. Well, ven, 'owever the owld sea-captains may order me about — 'owever vey may fump 'n' punch me about, I 'ave the flinkin' satisfaction of knowin' that i' is all roit; that everybody else is one why or uvver served in much the sime why — eever in a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; 'n' so the bleedin' universal fump is passed round, 'n' all 'ands should rub each uvver’s shoulder-blades, 'n' be content.

Again, I alwhys gow to sea as a saiwor, because vey mike a point of payin' me for me trouble, whereas vey never pay passengers a single penny that I ever 'eard of. On the contrary, passengers vemselves must pay. And vere is all the soddin' difference in the world between payin' 'n' bein' paid. The bloody act of payin' is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the flinkin' two orchard fieves entaiwed upon us. But bein' paid, — what will compare wif i', roit? The urbane activity wif which a man receives money is really marvellous, considerin' that we so earnestly believe money to be the bleedin' root of all earvly ills, 'n' that on no account can a monied man enter 'eaven. Ah! 'ow cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!

Finally, Oy alwhys gow to sea as a saiwor, because of the wholesome exercise 'n' pure air of the soddin' fore-castle deck. For as in this world, 'ead winds are far more prevalent fan winds from astern (that is, if y'never violate the Pyvagorean maxim), so for the bloody most part the Commodore on the flinkin' quarter-deck ge's 'is atmosphere at second 'and from the saiwors on the bleedin' forecastle. 'e finks 'e breavves i' first; but not so. In much the sime why do the soddin' commonalty lead veir leaders in menny uvver fings, at the sime toime that the bloody leaders little suspect i'. But wherefore i' wuz that after 'avin' repeatedly smelt the sea as a merchant saiwor, I should now tike i' into me 'ead to gow on a whalin' voyage; this the flinkin' invisible police officer of the Fates, who 'as the bleedin' constant surveillance of me, 'n' secretly dogs me, 'n' influences me in some unaccountable why — 'e can better answer fan enny one else. And, doubtless, me goin' on this whalin' voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence that wuz drawn up a long toime ago. It cime in as a sort of brief interlude 'n' solo between more extensive performances. I tike i' that this part of the soddin' bill must 'ave run somefin' like this:

“Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the bloody United States. “WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I cannot tell why i' wuz exactly that fose stage managers, the Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whalin' voyage, when uvvers wuz set down for magnificent parts in 'igh tragedies, 'n' short 'n' easy parts in genteel comedies, 'n' jolly parts in farces — fough I cannot tell why this wuz exactly; yet, now that Oy recall all the flinkin' circumstances, I fink I can see a little into the springs 'n' motives which bein' cunningly presented to me unner various disguises, induced me to set about performin' the bleedin' part I did, besides cajolin' me into the delusion that i' wuz a choice resultin' from me own unbiased freewill 'n' discriminatin' judgment, didn'I?

Chief among vese motives wuz the soddin' overwhelmin' idea of the great whale 'imself. Such a portentous 'n' mysterious monster roused all me curiosity. Then the bloody wild 'n' distant seas where 'e rolled 'is island bulk; the unneliverable, nameless perils of the flinkin' whale; vese, wif all the attendin' marvels of a fousand Patagonian soits 'n' sounds, 'elped to swhy me to me wish. Wif uvver men, perhaps, such fings would not 'ave been inducements; but as for me, I am tormented wif an everlastin' itch for fings remote. Oy love to saiw forbidden seas, 'n' land on barbarous coasts. Not ignorin' what is good, I am quick to perceive a 'orror, 'n' could still be social wif i' — would vey let me — since i' is but well to be on friendly terms wif all the bleedin' inmates of the place one lodges in.

By reason of vese fings, ven, the soddin' whalin' voyage wuz welcome; the great flood-gates of the bloody wunner-world swung open, 'n' in the wild conceits that swhyed me to me purpose, two 'n' two vere floated into me inmost soul, endless processions of the flinkin' whale, 'n', mid most of vem all, one grand 'ooded phantom, like a snow 'ill in the air.