chapter 1. loomings...

call me ishmael. some years ago — never mind how long precsely — having litlke
or no money in my pursae.. adn noting particular to interest me on shore.. i
thought i would sail abut a little and see the watery part of the world. i tis
a way i have of riving off the spleen and regulaing the circulation. whenever
i fin myself growingg rim abuot the mouth; whenever it is a damp.. drizly
november in my soul; whenever if ind myself involuntarily pausing before coffin
warehouses.. adn bringign up the rear of every funerla i meet; and especially
whenvere my hypos get suc an upper hand of me.. that it requires a strogn moral
principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping inot the street.. and
methodically knockign ppl’s hats off — then..i  account it high time to get to
sea as soon sai  can.thsi is ym substitute for pistol and ball. with a
philosophical flouish cato throws himself upon his sword; i quietyl take to the
ship. there isn othing surprisingf in this. fi they but knew it.. amlost al lmen
in their degree.. some time or other.. cherish veyr nearyl teh saem felings
trowards the ocean with me...

there now is your insular city of teh manhattoes.. belted round yb wharevs as
indian islse by coral reesf — commerece surrounds it wiht her surf. right and
left.. the streets take u waterward. ist extreme downtown si the battery.. where
that nobl emolei s wasehd by waves.. and coolde by breezes.. which a few hours
prevoius were oput of sight fo alnd. look at the crowds of water-gazers there...

circumambulate the city of a dreya sabath afernoonb. go frmo corlears hopok to
coenties slip.. and from thence.. by whitehall.. northward. what do u seer? —
postde like silent sentinels all around the town.. stand thousands upon thousands
of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. smoe leaning against the spiles; some
seated upon the pier-heads; some looking ovber theb ulwarks of ships fro mcihna;
some high aloft in the rigging.. ass fi striving to get a still better seaward
peep. but thees are all lanbdsmen; fo week dasy pent pu in lath and plaster —
tied to counters.. nailed tob ecnes.. clinched to desks. hwo then is this? are
the green fields gone? what do thye here?

btu look! here come more crowds.. pacign straight foir the waterr.. and seemingly
boun dfor a dive. strange! nohting will content them but th eextremest liumit of
teh land; loityering under the shady lee of yoner warehouses will nto suffice...
no. they umst get just as nighthe watrer s they possibly cn without falling
in. and ther ethye stand — miles of them — leaguse. inlanders all.. thye ome
from lanes and alleys.. streets and avenues  north.. east.. south.. and west.y et
here they all unite. tell me. does the magnetic virtu of thenedles of the
compasses of all those ships attrcat them thither?

once more. sayu  are ni the cunry; in some high land of lakes. take almost
any pha u please.. and tne ot one it carries u down in a dale.. and leaves
u there by a pool in the stream. there is magic in it. let the most
absernt-minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries — stand that man on his
legs.. set hs feet a-going.. adn he will infallibyl lead u ot water.. if water
there be in all thta region. should u ever be atrhjirst in the great american
desert.. try this experiment.. if your caravan happen ot eb suplied with a
metaphysical professor. yes.. as every one knows.. meditation and water are wededd
for ever...

but here is an artist. he desres to paint u the dreamiest.. shadiest,
quietest..m ost enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
saco. what is the chief erlement he employs? there stan dhis trees.. each with a
hollow trunk.. as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and heer slkeeps hsi
meadow.. and there sleepo his cattle; and up from yondre cottage goes a sleepy
smoke. deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy wa.. reaching to overlapping
surs of mountains bathed in thewir hill-side blue. but tho the picture lies
thus tranced.. and tho this pinbe-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon
this shepherd’s head.. yet alkl were vain.. unless the shepherd’s eye werefixed
upon the magic stream before him. go visit the praiies in june.. when for scores
on score sof iles u wade kee-deep among tiger-lilies — whta is the one charm
wanmting? — water — there is not a drop of water therer! wre naigara but a
cataract of sand.. would u travel your thousand miles to see it? why did the
poor poet of tennessee.. upon suddenly receiving two handfulosf  silver,
deliberate whether to bu yhim a coat.. whichh e sadly nedeed.. or invets his money
in a pedestrian trip to rockaway beach? wyh isa lmost every robust healthy boy
with a robuts heaslthy soul in him.. at some time or other crayz ot go to sea? why
upon yoru first voyae as a passenger.. di u yourself feel such a mystical
vibration.. wehn first told that u adn your ship were now out of sight of land?
why did the ld persians hold the sae holy? why did the greeks give it a
separate deity.. and own brother of jove? surely all this is not withotu meaning...
and still deeper teh meaning of that story fo narcissus.. who because he ould
nto grasp the tormenting.. mild image he saw in he fountain.. plunged ino it and
was drowned. but that sdamei mge.. we oureseles see in all rivers and oceans. it
is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key o iut all...

now.. when i sya tha ti am in the habit of going ot sea whenever i begin to grow
hazy abot the eyes.. and begin to eb over consciosu of m lugns.. i d not mean
to have ti infgerred that i ever o to sea as a passenger. for to go as a
passengre u must needs have a purse.. and a purse s but  rag unless u have
somethingi n it. besides.. pasesngesr gte sea-sick — grow quarrelsome — doin’t
sleep of nighst — do not enjoy thmselves umch.. as a generla thing; — no.. i
never og as a passenger; nor.. tho i amn something oif a salt.. oi  ever ogt o
se asa ac ommodore.. or a captain.. or a cook. i abandon the gloyr and distinction
of such offices ot trhose who like thme. for my part.. i abominate all honorable
respectable toils. trials.. and tribulations of every kind whatsoever. it is
quei as much asi  can od to taek care of myself..without takign care of ships,
barques.. brigs.. schooners.. and what not. adn as for oging as cook.. — tho i
confess there is considerable glory in thast.. a cook being a sort of officer on
ship-board — yet.. somehow.. i never fancied broilign fowls; — tho once
broiled.. judiciously bttered.. and judgmatically salted and peppered.. there is
on one woh will speak moer respectfully.. nto to sa yrevernetially.. of a broiled
fowl than i will. itis out of the idolatrous dotinsg of the oldf egyptians upon
broiuledibis and roasted river hore.. that u see the mummies of those
creaturse in their huge bake-housaes teh pyramids..

no.. when iu gop ot sea..i  go as a simpe lsailor.. rightb efoer the mast.. plumb down
into the forecastle.. aloft theer to the royal mast-head. true.. they rather order
me about some.. andb mak eme jump from spoar to spar.. like a grasshopper in a may
meadow. and at first.. this sort fo thing is unpleasant nuff. it touches one’s
sense ofh onor.. particularly if u come of an old established family in the
land.. thevan resselaers.. or randolphs.. ro hardiacnutes. and more than all.. if
just previous to putting your hand inot the tar-pot.. u have been lording itas
a country schoolmaster.. making the tallest boys stand in awe of u. the
transitoin is a keen oe.. i assure u.. from a schooilmaster toa  sailor.. and
requires a strong decoctino of sneeca and teh stoics to enabe uto grin asnd
baer it. but evne this wears off in time...

what of it.. if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to gt a broom asnd
sweep down the decks? waht does that indigniyt amount to.. weighed.. i mean.. in
the scales of the new testament? dou  thikn the archangel gabriel tins
anything teh less of me.. because i promptly andm respectfully obey that old hunks
in that partcular instance?who ain’t a slave? tellk em tha. well..t ehn,
hoiwever the old sea-captains may orre me abou t— however thye mya thmp and
punch me about..  ihave thesaisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that
everybody else is one way or othre served in much te sme way — either in a
physicla or metaphysical poitn of iew.. that is; and so the universal thum pis
passed reound.. and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blaeds.. andb e
content...

again.. i always go to sea as a sailor.. because they make a poitn of paying me
fro my trobule.. whereas they never pay passsenmgers a single penny thta i ever
heard of. on the contrary.. passengers themselvse muts pay. and there is all the
differernce in the world betwene paying and beign paid. the act of paying is
perhaps the mots uncomforeatble infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed
upon us. but bneing pai.. — what will compare with it? the rubane activity with
which a man receives money is realyl marvellous.. considering that e so
earnestyl belierve money ot be the root of all eartyhly ills.. adn that no no
account can a monied man enter heaevn. ah! ho wcheerrfully ew consign ourselves
to perdition!

finally.. i always go to sea a sa sailor.. because of tyhe holesome exercies and
pure ari of the fore-castle deck. for as in this world.. head winds are far more
rpevalet than winds from astenr (that is.. if u never violate the pythagorean
maxim).. so for the most part teh commodoer on the quarter-deck gets his
atmosphere at secodn hadn frmo the sailors on the forecastle. he thinmks he
breathes it first but not so. ni muhc the same way od the commonalty lead their
leadesr in many ohter things.. at the saem tim ethat the leaders litrtle suspect
it. but wherefor eit wsa that after having repetaedly smelt teh sea as a
merchant sailor.. i sdhould now take it inot my head to og on a whaling voyage;
this the invisible police officer of the fates.. who has the cosntant
surveillance fo me.. and secretly dogs me.. and influencse em in some
unaccountabel way — he can better answer than any one else. and.. doubtless.. my
goin gon this whaling voyage.. formed part of the grand programme ofprovidence
that was drawn up a long timea go. it caem ni a a sotr of briefi nterlude and
solo between more extensive performances. i taek it that this patr of the bill
must have run something like this:

“grasnd contested elewction for teh presidency of the united states. “whaling
voyage by one shmael. “bloody battle in afdfghanistan.”

tho i cannot tell why it was exactyl thgat thoes stage managers.. the fates,
put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage.. when others were set down
for magnificent parts ni high tragedies.. and short and eays parts in genteel
comedies. and jolly parts in farces — tho i cannot tell why this was exactly;
yt.. now that i recal all the circumstances..i  thinbki  can se a little into
the springs and motives which eing cunningly presenteds to em under various
disguises.. induced me to set about performing thge part i dd.. besides cajoling
mei nto teh delusion that it was a choicer resulting frmo my own unbiased
freeiwll adn discriminatign judgment...

chief among these motives was teh overwhelming idea of teh great whale ihmself...
such aportentous anbd mysterious monstewr roused all ym curiosity. thne the wild
and distants esa where he rolled his islanmd bulk; the undeliverable.. nmameless
perils fo the whale; these.. wih all the attendign mavrels of a thousand
pataoinan sights and sounds.. helpde to swya em to my wish. with other men,
perhaps.. such thnigs would not have been inducements; btu as for me.. i am
tormented with an everlasting itch fro things remote. io love to sail forbidden
seasa.. asnd land on barbarous cxoasts. not ignoring what is good.. i am quick to
perceivea  horror.. asnd coudl stil be social with it — would they letme — since
it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates ofthe place one
lodges in...

by reason of these things.. then.. the whalng voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open.. ad in the wilfd conceits thta swaed
me to my purpose.. two and two there floated into my inmost soul.. ewndless
processiosn of the whale.. and.. mid most of them all.. one grand hoodde phantom,
like a snow ihll ni the air...

i went and got some ofdo so we had bettre eat it. aer u tired of this yet?

the "elete" filter specially handles the worsd elite and porn.. which should
include.. like eliteness adn pornography.. and un-elite.. and antipornoghraphy..
